many of us like to start the day with a
cup of coffee
and perhaps end the day with a glass of
wine
or some other kind of alcoholic drink
but it turns out that these two
substances
alcohol and caffeine can have surprising
impacts on our sleep
[Music]
let's start with caffeine caffeine is
in a class of drugs that we call the
psychoactive stimulants
and everyone knows that caffeine can
make them more alert it can
wake them up but there are at least two
additional hidden features of caffeine
that some people
may not be aware of the first is the
duration of
action of caffeine caffeine for the
average adult will have what we call
a half-life of about five to six hours
what that means is that after about five
to six hours
fifty percent of that caffeine that you
had is still
circulating in your system what that
also means
is that caffeine has a quarter life
of about 10 to 12 hours in other words
let's say that you have a cup of coffee
at 2 p.m in the evening it could be that
almost a quarter of that caffeine is
still
swirling around in your brain at
midnight
and as a result it can make it harder
for an individual to
fall asleep or even stay asleep soundly
throughout the night so that's the first
feature of
caffeine the second issue with caffeine
is that it can change the quality of
your sleep
now some people will tell me that i'm
one of those individuals who can have an
espresso with dinner
and i fall asleep fine and i can stay
asleep
but even if that's true it turns out
that caffeine
can actually decrease the amount of deep
non-rapid eye movement sleep that we
have stages
three and four of non-rem sleep that's
that sort of restorative deep sleep
and as a consequence you can wake up the
next morning
and you don't feel refreshed you don't
feel restored
by your sleep but you don't remember
waking up you don't remember
struggling to fall asleep so you don't
make the connection
but nevertheless you may then find
yourself reaching for
two cups of coffee in the morning to
wake up rather than one
so that's caffeine but now let's move on
to alcohol because alcohol is perhaps
one of the most misunderstood
sleep aids out there in fact it's
anything
but a sleep aid and it can be
problematic for your sleep in at least
three different ways
first alcohol is in a class of drugs
that we call
the sedatives but sedation is not
sleep and studies teach us that those
two things are really quite different
sedation is a case where we're simply
switching off the firing
of the brain cells particularly in the
cortex
and that's not natural sleep in fact
during
deep non-rapid eye movement sleep for
example the brain
has this remarkable coordination of
hundreds of thousands of cells that all
of a sudden
fire together and then they all go
silent and then they all fire together
and then they go silent producing these
big powerful brain waves
of deep non-rem sleep and so that's the
first way
in which alcohol can be problematic
we're mistaking
sedation for deep sleep the second
problem with
alcohol is that it can actually fragment
your sleep
alcohol can actually trigger and
activate during sleep
what we call the fight or flight branch
of the nervous system
which will therefore wake you up more
frequently throughout the night
and alcohol can even increase the amount
of alerting chemicals
that are released by the brain once
again fragmenting your sleep
the third and final issue with alcohol
and sleep is that alcohol can actually
block
your rapid eye movement sleep or your
dream sleep
and as we'll learn in subsequent
episodes rem
sleep or rapid eye movement sleep dream
sleep provides a collection of benefits
things such as your emotional and mental
health even creativity
now i'm not here to tell anyone how to
live
i don't want to be puritanical i'm just
a scientist
what i want to try and do is provide you
with the information
about the relationship between caffeine
and alcohol on your sleep
so then you can make an informed choice
as to how best you want to live your
life when you're trying to prioritize
your sleep health